【标题】: 深圳技术大学与法国雷恩第一大学联合培养博士研究生项目2020年招生简章
【日期】: 2020-10-20

为实现优势互补，深化国际交流合作，增强国际知名度，深圳技术大学和法国雷恩第一大学决定开展博士研究生联合培养计划，旨在培养具有国际科学文化素养的高水平科研人才。

In order to realize complementary advantages, enhance international cooperation and international reputation, Shenzhen Technology University and University of Rennes 1 decided to launch a joint Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) programme, aiming to cultivate high-level scientific research talents with global vision.

法国雷恩第一大学

现“深圳技术大学与法国雷恩第一大学联合培养博士研究生项目”面向全球招生，欢迎各位优秀学子踊跃申请！

The "SZTU-UR1 Joint PhD Programme" is now open! All outstanding students are welcome to apply!

深圳技术大学

学校介绍

UNIVERSITIES INTRODUCTION

Part 01

深圳技术大学

Shenzhen Technology University

深圳技术大学是广东省和深圳市高标准建设的高水平、国际化、示范性一流应用技术大学。2018年11月30日，经教育部批准正式设立，学校定位于应用型高等学校。2019年9月，学校首年独立招生，共录取807人，招生的6个省份均高于高优线/自招线录取；其中，广东省理科投档线进入全省前十。2020年，学校招生规模翻番，面向全国10个省（区）招收1579名本科生，首年招收文科生、艺术生，理科一次性满额投档，列广东高校第九。

学校目前在光学工程（光机电工程与应用）招收学术型博士生；在物理学、机械工程、光学工程、计算机科学与技术、生物医学工程5个专业招收全日制学术学位硕士研究生；在电子信息、机械、材料与化工、交通运输4个专业招收全日制专业学位硕士研究生。目前在校研究生共180人，其中硕士研究生170人，博士研究生9人（含留学博士生1人）。学校充分借鉴和引进德国、瑞士等发达国家一流技术大学先进的办学经验，致力于培养本科及以上层次具有国际视野、工匠精神和创新创业能力的高水平工程师、设计师等高素质应用型人才，努力建成一流的应用型技术大学。

Shenzhen Technology University (SZTU) is a government-funded high-level higher education institution which is established by Guangdong Province and Shenzhen Municipality with a high standard. Its establishment was officially approved by the Ministry of Education as an autonomous university of applied sciences on November 30, 2018. In September 2019, Shenzhen Technology University was approved for opening the Bachelor degree programs independently and enrolled 807 students. Among six provinces, the enroll scores were above first-batch cut-off points. Particularly, the Science discipline enroll cut-off point of SZTU was ranked as top 10 among universities in Guangdong Province. In September 2020, SZTU enrollment scale doubled. 1579 undergraduates from 10 provinces (regions) were recruited across the country. This was the first year for SZTU to enroll liberal arts and art students. The number of science and engineering student applicants received was full in the first round, with the entering exam scores ranked ninth among universities in Guangdong.

At present, SZTU enrolls doctoral students in Optomechatronics Engineering and Application, full-time Master degree students (Academic) in Physics, Mechanical Engineering, Optical Engineering, Computer Science and Technology and Biomedical Engineering; and full-time Master degree students (Technical) in Electronic Information Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Materials and Chemical Engineering and Transportation. At present, there are 180 postgraduate students, including 170 Master students and 9 Ph.D. students (including 1 international Ph.D. student). To meet the urgent demand from the advanced manufacturing industry for local and global industries, SZTU is obligated to cultivate talents with spirit of craftsman such as advanced level engineers and designers. SZTU aims to establish itself as an open and innovative international university with Chinese characteristic and global vision.

Part 02

法国雷恩第一大学

University of Rennes 1

雷恩第一大学（University of Rennes 1），发展历史可追溯到1461年。在1969年法国教育体制改革后确立为雷恩第一大学。雷恩第一大学拥有39个科研中心，是一所多学科综合大学，共有在校学生3万多人。教职人员包括1500名教师、研究员和近900名行政与技术人员。学校致力于推进国际合作，签署了250项包括欧洲国家在内的国际合作协议，并接纳外国留学生2000多名。

学校开设的专业主要分为工程技术、医学和人文科学（经济管理、法律、社会科学等）三大部分。学校与全世界上百所大学有合作关系，每年有近700名学生到国外学校交换课程或参加实习。

The history of University of Rennes 1 dates back to 1461. It was established as the University of Rennes 1 after the reform of the French education system in 1969. It is a multidisciplinary university with 39 research centers and over 30,000 students. The faculty consists of 1,500 professors, researchers and nearly 900 administrative and technical staffs. The university is open to international cooperation (250 signed international cooperation agreements, including those in Europe) and has accepted more than 2,000 foreign students.

The majors offered by the university are mainly classified into Engineering Technology, Medical and Humanities (Economic Management, Law, Social Science, etc.). University of Rennes 1 is an international institute of higher education. Not only does it have cooperative relationships with hundreds of universities around the world, but also 700 students go to exchange and internships every year.

培养形式

THE FORM OF JOINT CULTIVATION

1.整个项目过程中，学生接受合作单位双方导师的共同培养，并在双方合作指导下完成博士毕业论文，学生的录取、考试和学位授予均遵循雷恩第一大学的规定。

2.联合培养期间，采取1.5+1.5培养模式，学生需要在深圳技术大学学习1.5年。深圳技术大学及雷恩第一大学导师共同指导博士生选题和论文研究工作。

3.完成学业者可获得雷恩第一大学颁发的博士学位。

During the joint training period, the supervisory team will be composed of at least one supervisor from each university and will work as a unified team to jointly supervise the candidate. The admission, progression, examination and degree award will follow the regulations of University of Rennes 1.

During the joint training period, the 1.5+1.5 training mode will be adopted, which means the students need to study at SZTU for 1.5 years. The supervisors from Shenzhen Technology University and University of Rennes 1 will co-supervise the doctoral candidate's research topic and thesis.

The final Ph.D. degree will be awarded only by University of Rennes 1.

招生专业

DISCIPLINE

>>材料科学及化学科学、光学工程学科领域

>>Materials Science, Chemical Science, Optical Engineering

招生计划

QUOTA

>>2020年计划招生5人

>>The 2020 enrollment quota will be 5.

申请条件

REQUIREMENTS

1.学历应满足以下条件之一:

a. 中国内地高校全日制硕士研究生毕业并取得硕士学位（应届毕业生应于入学前取得毕业证和学位证）。获中国港澳台地区高校硕士研究生学位，具有教育部留学服务中心学历认证证明。

b. 获其他国家高校硕士研究生学位，具有教育部留学服务中心学历认证证明。

2.语言能力:

能够熟练使用英语进行写作和交流，并经面试专家组考核通过。

3.身心健康，符合国家规定的体检标准。

4.申请方式及材料

申请者须提交下述内容，文件须按下表顺序编号、命名后打包发送至邮箱：gra@sztu.edu.cn（邮件主题：申请者姓名+拟入学年份+深技大博士研究生项目申请）申请材料发送时间截止至2020年11月10日（雷恩第一大学将于12月中旬通知最终录取结果）。

*申请者须承诺学历、学位证书和其他申请材料的真实性，一经招生单位或认证部门查证为不属实，即取消报考或学习资格。应届毕业生入学前必须获得学位证及毕业证，否则学校有权取消录取资格。

REQUIREMENTS

1. Your degree should meet one of the following requirements:

a. A full-time master’s degree from a Chinese university, graduates should obtain a graduation certificate and degree certificate before the admission. A master's degree from a Hong Kong, Macaoor Taiwan university should have an academic certification from the Overseas Education Service Center of the Ministry of Education.

b. A master's degree from a overseas university (should have an academic certification from the Overseas Education Service Center of the Ministry of Education).

2. Your language level should meet the following requirements:

Be able to write and communicate in English and pass the interview of the supervisor group.

3. Your physical and mental health should pass the national medical examination standard requirements.

HOW TO APPLY

Applicants should submit the following materials and the materials should be numbered, named, packaged and sent to this E-mail address: gra@sztu.edu.cn (E-mail subject: applicant name + intended year of enrollment + SZTU Joint PhD Programme).

Deadline for submission: November 10th, 2020(University of Rennes 1 will release the final admission result in the middle of December, 2020).

*Applicants must ensure the authenticity of academic qualifications, degree certificates and other application materials. If not, once discovered, the registration or learning qualification will be canceled. Fresh graduates must obtain the degree certificate and the graduation certificate before the enrollment, otherwise the school has the right to cancel the admission qualification.

报名流程

ADMISSION FLOW

1.提交申请材料

2.深圳技术大学研究生院初选、学校审核并推荐。

研究生院对提交完整资料的申请者进行初选，并按照拟推荐名额组织遴选后按程序推荐。

1. Submit application materials.

2. Graduate School of Shenzhen Technology University initially selects the applicants who have submitted the materials completely.

面试及录取

INTERVIEW & ADMISSION

根据需要参加导师组面试，按深圳技术大学及雷恩第一大学的录取程序预录取。

预录取申请者经深圳技术大学和雷恩第一大学审核通过后，发放录取通知书。具体开学日期及入学手续等相关信息将在录取通知书中说明。

The applicants will be interviewed by the supervisor group. The applicants will be admitted according to the admission procedure of SZTU and University of Rennes 1.

After the application is successfully approved by SZTU and University of Rennes 1, the admission letter will be issued. The starting date and admission procedures will be stated in the admission letter.

补助

SUBSIDIES

在规定的学制范围内，深圳技术大学为联合培养博士研究生提供生活补助，标准为总额20万元人民币/人，以资助研究生全身心投入学习和开展科学研究，取得高水平的研究成果，完成博士学业。奖学金获得与拨付按双方协议相关条款执行。

SZTU will provide living subsidies for the joint training doctoral students, with a total amount of CNY200,000 per person to support doctoral students to devote themselves to study and achieve high level research results. The scholarship will be awarded and disbursed according to the terms and conditions mutually agreed by both parties.

费用

FEES

学生在深圳技术大学学习期间，学费为每学期5000元，住宿费为一年1200元（水、电、网等费用另外缴纳）。在雷恩第一大学学费、住宿费等自理。

Within study at SZTU, the tuition fee is CNY5,000 per semester, and the accommodation fee is CNY1,200 per year (excluding water, electricity, internet, etc). During the period of study at the University of Rennes 1, students have to pay for his/her tuition fee, accommodation fee and other living expense.

联系方式

CONTACT

深圳技术大学联系人：

叶老师：+86-0755-23256053

邮箱：gra@sztu.edu.cn

雷恩第一大学联系人：

Delphine Blot :+33(0)223235060

邮箱：delphine.blot@univ-rennes.fr

Mrs Ye (for domestic)：

+86-0755-23256053

E-mail：gra@sztu.edu.cn

Mrs Delphine Blot(for international)：

+33(0)223235060

E-mail：delphine.blot@univ-rennes.fr

温馨提示

REMINDER

请扫描下方二维码下载申请表

Please scan the QR Code to download the application form

更多详情可前往深圳技术大学研究生院网站查询了解

https://gra.sztu.edu.cn/index.htm

For more details, please visit the website of Graduate School of Shenzhen Technology University

https://gra.sztu.edu.cn/index.htm