【标题】: 见行见知见未来 | 深圳技术大学2023年开学典礼致辞
【日期】: 2023-09-15

尊敬的Robert Grebner校长、尊敬的许鹰泉总裁、亲爱的同学们、老师们，各位来宾：

Esteemed President Robert Grebner,Honorable President Xu Yingquan,Dear Fellow Students, Faculty, and Distinguished Guests,

大家晚上好!

翻越书山题海，穿过人山人海，沿着山河大海，同学们长途跋涉，抵达兰田。你们置身其中的，是一所真实的“山河大学”，山环河绕，天地崭新，这里是青春的停机坪，是梦想的启航线。

Good evening!

After traversing mountains of books and oceans of tests, crossing swarms of people, and following the course of rivers and seas, you have all traveled a long distance to reach the Lantian Road. You now find yourself in a true "University of Mountains and Rivers" surrounded by landscapes fresh and new, a place serves as the tarmac of youth and the runway from which dreams take flight.

我们的大学迎风敞开，没有围墙，却有“门槛”。今年“门槛”略高，理科类最低录取线列全省第7。同学们要登堂入室，走进大学，顺利实现由高中生向大学生的过渡，首先要跨过对大学认知的三道“门槛”——

Our university stands bravely against the wind, devoid of enclosing walls yet possessing "thresholds". This year the "threshold" was slightly higher, ranking seventh in the province for the minimum entrance score in science. To transition smoothly from high school students to university students, and to step into the university halls properly, you first have to cross three "thresholds" of understanding university life—

第一，高考是开启人生的新旅程。高考是人生第一次拼尽全力为梦想而战，此战并非决战，不足以论成败定乾坤。每个阶段性的努力，都不能成为人生一劳永逸的捷径。决定人生上限的，不是高考成绩，而是不断学习，不断进步和成长，让优秀者卓越，让后进者逆袭，这才是打开成功人生的正确方式。

Firstly, the college entrance examination marks the onset of a new voyage in one's life. The college entrance examination represents the first time in life where you fight with all your might for your dreams. However, this battle is not the decisive one; it is insufficient to dictate success or failure, to determine your destiny. The efforts of each phase cannot become a shortcut to everlasting success in life. What dictates the upper limit of life is not the college entrance exam score, but continuous learning, ongoing progress, and growth. Letting the excellent become extraordinary and enabling the latecomers to overtake is the right way to unlock a successful life.

大学是人生新的开端。抵达这里，意味着新的成长空间已经打开。这里只关乎成长，无所谓成败，神奇的润园赋予你们重启的机会。这里空间广阔，鼓励尝试，创造可能，但时间有限，机会有定数，请珍惜时光，提高效率，在不断试错中发现自己，发现世界；在不断解决问题中重塑自身，成就最好的自己。

The university marks a novel commencement in one's life. Arriving here signifies that a new realm of growth opportunities has been unveiled. This environment is solely about growth and development; success and failure are inconsequential. The enchanting Runyuan endows you with opportunities for rejuvenation. The expanse here is vast, fostering experimentation, and nurturing possibilities. However, time is finite and opportunities are quantified. I urge you to cherish these moments, optimize efficiency, and in the process of continuous trial and error, discover oneself and the world around. By persistently tackling challenges, you can reshape your identity and achieve your utmost potential.

第二，大学是塑造自我的新篇章。关于大学，耳熟能详的说法是“上大学就轻松了”。曾经全力以赴的你们，走进大学，当不念过往，不畏将来，不背负包袱，不怀抱遗憾，找寻目标，立定理想。比起学业繁忙，丧失目标的人生迷茫，才是人生不可承受之重，没有方向的船，什么风都不是顺风。

Secondly, the university represents a new chapter in self-cultivation. A common adage concerning higher education is that "university life is relaxed." Those of you who once committed wholeheartedly, as you step into the university environment, should not dwell on the past nor fear the future. It's crucial to operate without burdens or regrets, and to diligently seek out your goals and establish your ideals. Compared to the rigor of academics, the true unbearable weight in life is the disorientation that comes from losing one's purpose. A ship without a direction finds no wind favorable.

上大学不是享受生活，而是塑造自我；创景路不是休闲大道，而是探险之路。老地图找不到新大陆。走这条路，不仅需要耐心和韧性，还需要想象力、创造力和好奇心，它们决定你们在新赛道能走多远。

Attending a university is not about indulging in life, but rather about molding oneself; Chuanjing Road is not a leisurely avenue, but a path of exploration. One cannot discover new territories with old maps. Embarking on this journey requires not only patience and resilience but also imagination, creativity, and curiosity. These attributes determine how far you can advance on this new track.

第三，技术大学是创新发展的新大学。中国进入高质量发展新时代，工程师红利是推动发展的重要力量。华为逆势飞扬，推出Mate60，得益于高效、奋进的工程师团队。高水平工程师、设计师、精算师，是城市人才高地、创新动力和文化标志的重要支撑。高标准创办技术大学是高等教育赋能粤港澳大湾区发展规模、层次和品质再提升的重要举措。深圳先锋城市的禀赋为技术大学注入敢为人先、创新发展的精神血液，城市强大的开放势能和发展动能，将推动学校迈向一流、成为标杆。

Thirdly, the Technology University emerges as a new hub for innovative development. As China steers into a new epoch characterized by high-quality development, the contribution of engineers serves as a pivotal force driving this advancement. Huawei has flown against the current, launching the Mate60, a testament to the efficacy and relentless spirit of its engineering team. High-caliber engineers, designers, and actuaries are vital backbones, sustaining the elevated grounds of urban talent, the engine of innovation, and representing significant cultural hallmarks. Establishing a Technology University with high standards is a crucial initiative in augmenting the scope, caliber, and quality of higher education, thereby empowering the developmental trajectory of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area. The pioneering spirit of Shenzhen, a trailblazer among cities, injects a spirit of audacious innovation and developmental vigor into the Technology University. The city's formidable force in fostering openness and development stands to catalyze the university's journey toward becoming a premier institution, setting a benchmark in the educational landscape.

大学的功能不仅是遴选，更是培养。大学最值得骄傲的，不是同学们进门的分数，而是出门的光芒。创校七年多来，同学们主动与强手过招，敢与名校同台竞技，在国际、国家重大赛事获奖600余项。华为、腾讯等头部企业纷纷向毕业生敞开大门。

The function of a university is not just selection, but more importantly, cultivation. What a university should be most proud of is not the scores students have when they enter, but the brilliance they exude when they leave. In the seven years since its establishment, our students have proactively competed with the best, dared to compete on the same stage with renowned institutions, and won more than 600 awards in major international and national competitions. Leading companies like Huawei and Tencent have eagerly opened their doors to our graduates.

同学们，请相信，技术大学是你们正确的选择；请努力，让你们的选择，成为决定未来发展的正确之举。

Dear students, please believe that choosing the Technology University is the right decision for you. Work hard to ensure that your choice becomes the right move that determines your future pursuit.

迈过门槛，推门登堂，何以入室？

Having crossed the threshold and pushed open the door, how then shall you enter the chamber?

读懂校园建筑语言，是打开技术大学的快捷方式。校园建筑群的诞生，不仅意味着建造的完成，也宣示一种成长道路和生活方式，隐喻这片场域的精神。行走润园，独特的建筑语言，提示技大文化的三个向度。

Understanding the architectural language of the campus is a shortcut to unlocking the essence of the Technology University. The birth of the campus architecture complex not only signifies the completion of its construction but also proclaims a path of growth and a way of life, symbolizing the attributes of this domain. Walking through the campus, the unique architectural language hints at the three dimensions of the university's culture.

——请感受崇高的形态，心怀远志。在润园，崇高是群山竞秀，高阁涵云，让你们感受巍峨与厚重；它是阳光穿透图书馆的穹顶，让你们仰望智慧的光芒；它是层高16米的实验室，让你们体验科技之美、学习之乐；它是高敞的长廊，徜徉其间，顿生庄重与大气；它是一所大学崛起于荒烟蔓草，让你们理解使命与奉献。崇高感是大学殿堂的标配。感受崇高，迈向崇高，是走向卓越的必修课，是大学最壮丽的风景。

— Also, please learn to experience the sublime in different forms and harbor grand aspirations. In Runyuan, the sublime is seen in the competing beauty of the mountains and the towering halls that embrace the clouds, allowing you to feel the grandeur and depth; it is the sunlight piercing through the dome of the library, encouraging you to look up to the radiance of wisdom; it is in the laboratories with a height of 16 meters, offering you the experience of the beauty of technology and the joy of learning; it is in the high and spacious corridors where, wandering around, you suddenly feel the solemnity and grandeur; it is the university rising from the desolate weeds, inspire you to understand the mission and dedication. A sense of sublimity is a standard feature of a university's hall. To feel the sublime and strive towards it is a mandatory course towards excellence, and the most magnificent scenery in a university.

请将崇高化形为使命。青春不以山海为远，使命只向家国未来。给人生确立一个海拔，整合你的追求和向往，对国家忠诚，对人生真诚，既寻谋生之路，又学立世之道，把个人梦想融入伟大中国梦，在迎接下一个“百年”中体验崇高感，找到存在感、价值感和幸福感。

Please transform the sublime into a mission. Youth perceive no mountains and seas as too distant with the mission to serve the future of our homeland. You shall set a height for your life by integrating your pursuits and aspirations. Be loyal to your country and sincere in your life, seeking a way to make a living while learning the way to establish yourself in the world, and integrating personal dreams into the great Chinese dream, then you may experience the sense of sublimity, existence, value, and happiness on the course for the second centenary goal of China.

请将崇高还原为责任。大学的崇高，落实在课堂，课堂体现教师最大价值和最高尊严。师生合作，教学相长，课堂神圣。教学，不是教师带着教材走向学生，而是学生带着求知走向教师，走向生产，走向生活。

Please reduce the sublime to a responsibility. The sublimity of a university is epitomized within its classrooms, where the most profound value and utmost dignity of a teacher are manifested. Within these sanctified spaces, teachers and students collaborate, fostering mutual growth and enlightenment. Education is not merely a conduit where teachers approach students with textbooks; rather, it's a journey where students, armed with an insatiable thirst for knowledge, approach their teachers and subsequently venture into production and the broader aspects of life.

好老师与好学生，双向奔赴，互相成就。好学生知道“为何而来”，不会“买椟还珠”。好老师并不意味着“好说话”，更不是“手下留情”，让你考试轻松过关，而是充实你的时光，掀起思想的暴风，点燃生命的激情，提供成长的力量。最可贵的，是多年后仍给你长久的温暖和感动。课堂不应回避质疑与批评，准确的批评难得，严厉的爱难给，请珍视它！

Excellent teachers and exceptional students gravitate towards each other, mutually elevating and realizing each other's potential. Good students know "why they are here" and won't "buy the box and return the pearl" (an idiom meaning to miss the essence). A good teacher doesn't necessarily mean they are "easygoing" or "lenient", letting you pass exams with ease. Instead, they enrich your time, stir up storms of thought, ignite the passion of life, and provide strength for growth. The most precious thing is that which still provides you with enduring warmth and touching moments many years later. In the classroom, questions and criticism should not be avoided. Precise criticism is rare, and tough love is hard to give. Please cherish it!

请将崇高体现在日常。心有崇高，万物庄重，生命格局广大，就能走出日常琐碎的烦恼。行走润园，请从步态和作风改起，不要慢慢腾腾犹犹豫豫，要挺胸抬头，要坚定自信，大步流星往前走。今天的步伐决定明天的风景；今天的态度决定明天的高度。

Please incorporate the sublime into your daily life. When the heart embraces the sublime, every aspect of life assumes gravitas. With such a grand pattern of life, one can transcend the trivial troubles of the mundane. As you walk through Runyuan, start with adjusting your stride and demeanor. Do not tread hesitantly or languidly; stand straight, hold your head high, and move forward with unwavering confidence and determined steps. The pace you set today determines the scenery of tomorrow; the attitude you hold today dictates the heights you'll reach tomorrow.

——请保持开放的心态，迭代自我。技术大学是“空中大学”，通透开放，八面来风，任意西东，是通向未来的入口，是连接世界的通道。开放是技术大学与生俱来的禀赋。开放的大学，孕育开放的心灵。

— Please maintain an open-minded approach and continually iterate on yourself. The Technology University is like an "aerial university" - transparent, open, welcoming insights from all directions. It's a gateway to the future and a conduit connecting the world. Openness is an inherent attribute of the University. An open university nurtures open minds.

心态开放的人，自信而不自负。放下自满自足，敢于承认自身的有限性，敢于面对和接受批评，愿意接触不同人群，接纳不同观点。

Individuals with an open-minded attitude are confident without being arrogant. They let go of complacency and self-satisfaction, dare to acknowledge their own limitations, and are brave enough to face and accept criticism. They are willing to engage with different groups of people and to embrace diverse perspectives.

心态开放的人，有主见而少偏见。请保持好奇心和求知欲，不拘泥于小圈子，不困守于信息茧房，在看似不相干的现象之间建立联系。

Open-minded individuals have convictions yet hold few prejudices. Please retain your curiosity and desire for knowledge, avoid confining yourself to a small circle, and do not be trapped in an information cocoon. Strive to establish connections between seemingly unrelated phenomena.

心态开放的人，超越自我，迭代自我。突破常规思维定式，善于跳出自己，拥有从自身以外视界想象体验的能力，能在更高层次俯瞰问题，能从他人角度分析问题，从多方面考虑和解决问题。

Individuals with an open-minded attitude transcend and continually refine themselves. They break through conventional patterns of thought, excel at stepping outside their own perspectives, and possess the ability to imagine and experience from viewpoints other than their own. They can view issues from a higher vantage point, analyze problems from others' perspectives, and consider and solve problems from multiple angles.

开放是自我进化的前提。唯有开放，才能突破傲慢和偏见，真正定义自己的模样。只有打开自己，才能打开世界，才有机会改变自己，迭代自己。

Openness is a prerequisite for personal evolution. Only through openness can one break through arrogance and prejudice, truly defining their own identity. Only by opening oneself up can one unlock the world, and only then does one have the opportunity to change and iterate upon oneself.

——请坚持实践的姿态，链启未来。校园无围墙，空中架连廊，技大校园自成体系。链接是校园建筑形态，也是大学生涯的关键词。技术大学的培养路径，是在开放场景中实践联系理论，以行启知，以行见知，不止培养学生的技术技能，而且全面开启链接样态，实现学生的系统性成长。

— Please maintain a posture of continuous practice to forge links to the future. With no boundaries but aerial corridors forming connections, the Technology University campus is a system in itself. Connectivity is not just the architectural form of the campus, but also a keyword throughout university life. The pedagogical trajectory of the Technology University emphasizes the amalgamation of practice with theory within open settings. It adopts an approach where action enlightens knowledge and where knowledge is gleaned through action. The aim is not solely to cultivate students' technical skills but also to holistically initiate interconnected modalities, ensuring the systematic growth of the students.

首先，在开放的场景中寻找问题。

请不要只在文献中寻找学习目标和研究课题。将学习研究坐落在更大参数和更宽场域中，到大自然、生产中、社会上去观察，你会发现时时处处都有好问题。

First and foremost, seek out problems in open environments.

Please don't limit your learning objectives and research topics solely to literature. Situate your studies and research within broader contexts and wider fields. Venture into nature, production environments, and society at large to observe. You'll discover that profound inquiries permeate every moment and every circumstance.

请不要只在屏幕中观察理解现实世界。多见人多看书，多参加活动，多接触自然，多做连接，去体验，去感受，让自己活跃在开放的信息环境，沉浸在深厚的学习氛围，才能打开世界，打开未来。

Please don't solely observe and understand the real world through screens. Meet more people, read more books, participate in more activities, engage more with nature, and foster more connections. Go out to experience and feel, allowing yourself to be active in an open information environment and immersed in a profound learning atmosphere. Only then can you unlock the world and unveil the future.

其次，在开放的场景中解决问题。

技术大学为解决问题而来，坚持实践育人。实践是以解决现实工程技术问题为核心的动手力、思考力和架构力的全面综合，用实践联系理论、提升理论，将理论和现实、知识点和应用场景结合，将不同层次知识点、不同学科知识点，围绕“共同问题”产生联系，形成结构，构建体系。

Next, solve problems in open environments.

The Technology University is here to solve problems, adhering to a practice-oriented approach to education. Practice entails a holistic integration of hands-on skills, critical thinking, and architectural strength, centered around resolving real-world engineering and technical issues. It involves linking theory with practice to elevate theoretical understanding, marrying theory with reality, and associating knowledge points with application scenarios. By rallying different levels of knowledge points and interdisciplinary knowledge points around "common problems," connections are forged, structures are formed, and systems are built.

见行见知见未来——

这七个字，向你们敞开了青春飞翔的跑道。

在这条路上，以终为始，以行为知，重新演绎行与知的古老命题。请记住，行，才是知的真实表达。

Through actions, Gain knowledge, Envision the future—

These seven Chinese characters pave the runway for your youth to soar.

On this journey, begin with the end in mind and let actions inform knowledge, revisiting the age-old proposition between action and wisdom. Remember, it is through action that knowledge truly manifests.

在这条路上，行知结伴，人生精彩。

同学们，大学的进度条开启，精彩必将上演。请以通透之心、智慧之眼、真诚之态，恋山河，启未来。

谢谢大家！

On this journey, when action and knowledge walk hand in hand, life becomes remarkable.

Dear students, as the progress bar of university life begins, splendid moments are bound to unfold. Please approach it with a transparent heart, wise eyes, and sincere attitude. Cherish the landscapes, ignite the future.

Thank you all!

来源 | 校长办公室